In 1202 he took part in a war between Assisi and Perugia, 
was held prisoner for almost a year, and on his release fell seriously ill. 
After his recovery, he attempted to join the papal forces under Count Gentile 
against the emperor Frederick II in Apulia in late 1205. On his journey, however, 
he had a vision or dream that bade him return to Assisi and await the call to a new kind of knighthood. 
On his return, he dedicated himself to solitude and prayer so that he might know God’s will for him.
Several other episodes contributed to his conversion to the apostolic life: a vision of Christ 
while Francis prayed in a grotto near Assisi; an experience of poverty during a pilgrimage to Rome,
 where, in rags, he mingled with the beggars before St. Peter’s Basilica and begged alms; an incident 
 in which he not only gave alms to a leper (he had always felt a deep repugnance for lepers) but also kissed his hand. 

  Among such episodes, the most important, according to his disciple and first biographer, Thomas of Celano, 
  occurred at the ruined chapel of San Damiano outside the gate of Assisi when Francis heard the crucifix above 
  the altar command him: “Go, Francis, and repair my house which, as you see, is well-nigh in ruins.” Taking this literally,
  Francis hurried home, gathered some fine cloth from his father’s shop, and rode off to the nearby town of Foligno, 
  where he sold both cloth and horse. He then tried to give the money to the priest at San Damiano,
  whose refusal prompted Francis to throw the money out the window. Angered, his father kept him at home and 
  then brought him before the civil authorities. When Francis refused to answer the summons, 
  his father called him before the bishop of Assisi. Before any accusations were made, 
  Francis “without a word peeled off his garments even removing his breeches and restored them to his father.” 
  Completely naked, he said: “Until now I have called you my father on earth. 
  But henceforth I can truly say: Our Father who art in heaven.” The astonished bishop gave him a cloak, 
  and Francis went off to the woods of Mount Subasio above the city.